content/blog/2-fun-with-emacs.md, before:

Title: Fun with Emacs Lisp
Date: 2013-06-14
Slug: fun-with-emacs-lisp
Summary: Emacs lisp is an interesting programming language

An interseting thing about the world or modern programming is that many decisions have already been made for us. For example, what the the following code snippets do?

Python:

	:::python
	def fun1():
		x = 12
		return lambda y: x*y

	fun1()(3)

Javascript:

	:::javascript
	var fun1 = function() {
		var x = 12;
		return function (y) {
			return x*y;
		};
	};

	fun1()(3)

The answer is, they print 36. But what about the equivalent code in Emacs lisp?:

	:::scheme
    (funcall (let ((x 12))
		       (lambda (y)
			     (* x y))) 3)
				 
This throws an error: `(void-variable x)`. Huh? What is going on? The answer is that most modern languages, including python and javascript, are lexically scoped, whereas emacs lisp, being many decades old, is dynamically scoped. What does this mean? It has to do with the resolution of free variables. In each code example above, `x` is a free variable in the innermost function call because it is not passed as an argument and has no local definition. How is the definition of a free variable resolved then? In lexically scoped languages, the language looks for definitions of free variables in the immediate _lexical environment_, whereas in dynamically scoped langauges, the language looks for definitions of free variables in the immediate _evaluating environment_. 

This explains our differing results above. Python and javascript see a free variable `x` in the definition of `fun2`. They go look for a definition in the enclosing lexical scope (the definition of `fun1`), see that here x is defined to be 12, and use 12 as the value for x. Emacs lisp, on other hand, does the following. Using `funcall`, we asked it to call the following with argument `3`:

	:::scheme
    (let ((x 12))
		   (lambda (y)
			 (* x y)))
			 
The `let` statement says that during the evaluation of the following code, let the value of `x` be 12. The keyword here is _evaluation_. Emacs lisp allows `x` to be 12 during the evaluation, which returns a function of `y`. The evaluation is then over, so emacs lisp promptly forgets the value of `x`! The lambda function returned has no notion of the fact that `x` is twelve in its lexical environment; when this function is called by `funcall` it is called in the global scope, in which there is no definition of `x`, hence `(void-variable x)`.

This seems weird by modern lights, because most languages we write code in regularly are lexically scoped. Emacs lisp gets ever weirder though. Remember when I said that python and javascript "go look for a definition in the enclosing lexical scope"? That was sort of a lie. They don't really go looking through the text of your code trying to find definitions, what actually happens is that when `fun1` evaluates, it doesn't just return a bare function, it returns a _closure_, which is a data structure that includes the inner function _along with the definitions of the variables in its lexical environment_. When python or javascript needs to know the value of `x` during evaluation, they go look up its definition in the closure. You can't actually examine closures in the language itself; they're special and hidden away in the implementation. But let's go back to Elisp for a moment. When we execute

	:::scheme
	(let ((x 12))
			 (lambda (y)
		   (* x y)))
		   
We get back:
	
	:::scheme
    (lambda (y) (* x y))
	
which is a function definition, pretty much what we expected. Notice that this expression evluated on its own (which is effectively what we were doing when we did the `funcall` above) hs no way of figuring out what `x` is (i.e. no closure containing a definition of `x`). Where Emacs lisp gets weird is that it is possible to have lexical scoping, but its an optional feature that you have to turn on. Let's try it:

	:::scheme
	(setq lexical-binding t)
	
	(let ((x 12))
		   (lambda (y)
		     (* x y)))
		   
Now the second expression evaluates to:

	:::scheme
	(closure ((x . 12) t) (y) (* x y))
	
Aha! A closure! Because lexical scope was tacked onto Elisp decades after its creation, it doesn't hide closures away from you the way more modern languages do; they are right there, available to be inspected as data structures in the language itself. If we funcall this with 3 as an argument, we get 36, just like we did in python or javascript. Internally, they are doing the same thing with the closure, we as programmers are just not allowed to see it. Emacs lisp is adorably trusting; however, which means we can do stupidly silly things. The closure is just a list, so we can use it as we would any other:

	:::scheme
    (setq cl (let ((x 12))
		       (lambda (y)
		         (* x y))))
				 
The closure is now bound to the symbol `cl`, and we can funcall it:

	:::scheme
    (funcall cl 3)
    ;; => 36
	
We can also modify it, e.g.:

	:::scheme
    (setcdr (caadr cl) 5)
	
We set the `cdr` of the `car` of the `car` of the `cdr` of `cl` to 5. This changes cl to:

	:::scheme
    (closure ((x . 5) t) (y) (* x y))
	
And now:

	:::scheme
    (funcall cl 3)
	;; => 15
	
This is hilarious, but as Gary Bernhardt said, [if you ever actually do this then wat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXEgk1Hdze0).

Commit message:

some grammatical/typo fixes and sentence restructuring

content/blog/2-fun-with-emacs.md, after:

Title: Fun with Emacs Lisp
Date: 2013-06-14
Slug: fun-with-emacs-lisp
Summary: Emacs lisp is an interesting programming language

An interseting thing about the world of modern programming is that many decisions have already been made for us. For example, what do the following code snippets do?

Python:

	:::python
	def fun1():
		x = 12
		return lambda y: x*y

	fun1()(3)

Javascript:

	:::javascript
	var fun1 = function() {
		var x = 12;
		return function (y) {
			return x*y;
		};
	};

	fun1()(3)

The answer is, they print 36. Each returns outer function returns an anonymous function that is then called with the value `3` a an input. But what about the equivalent code in Emacs lisp?:

	:::scheme
    (funcall (let ((x 12))
		       (lambda (y)
			     (* x y))) 3)
				 
This throws an error: `(void-variable x)`. Huh? What is going on? The answer is that most modern languages, including python and javascript, are lexically scoped, whereas emacs lisp, being many decades old, is dynamically scoped. What does this mean? It has to do with the resolution of free variables. In each code example above, `x` is a free variable in the innermost function call because it was not passed as an argument and has no local definition. How is the definition of a free variable resolved then? In lexically scoped languages, the language looks for definitions of free variables in the immediate _lexical environment_, whereas in dynamically scoped langauges, the language looks for definitions of free variables in the immediate _evaluating environment_. 

This explains our differing results above. Python and javascript see a free variable `x` in the anonymous function returned by `fun1`. They go look for a definition in the enclosing lexical scope (the definition of `fun1`), see that here x is defined to be 12, and so use 12 as the value for x. Emacs lisp, on other hand, does something different. Using `funcall`, we asked it to call the following with argument `3`:

	:::scheme
    (let ((x 12))
		   (lambda (y)
			 (* x y)))
			 
The `let` statement says that during the evaluation of the following code, let the value of `x` be 12. The keyword here is _evaluation_. Emacs lisp allows `x` to be 12 during the evaluation, which returns a function of `y`. The evaluation is then over, so emacs lisp promptly forgets the value of `x`! The lambda function returned has no notion of the fact that `x` is twelve in its lexical environment; when this function is called by `funcall` it is called in the global scope, in which there is no definition of `x`, hence `(void-variable x)`.

This seems weird by modern lights, because most languages we write code in regularly are lexically scoped. Emacs lisp gets ever weirder though. Remember when I said that python and javascript "go look for a definition in the enclosing lexical scope"? That was sort of a lie. They don't really go looking through the text of your code trying to find definitions, what actually happens is that when `fun1` evaluates, it doesn't just return a bare anonymous function. Instead, the function is returned along with some information about its lexical environment. This infrmation is called a _closure_, and usually consists of the values that any free variables had at the time the function was definied. When python or javascript needs to know the value of `x` during evaluation, they go look up its definition in the closure. You can't actually examine closures in the language itself; they're specially protected and hidden away in the implementation. But let's go back to Elisp for a moment. When we execute

	:::scheme
	(let ((x 12))
			 (lambda (y)
		   (* x y)))
		   
We get back:
	
	:::scheme
    (lambda (y) (* x y))
	
which is a function definition, pretty much what we expected. Notice that this expression evluated on its own (which is effectively what we were doing when we did the `funcall` above) hs no way of figuring out what `x` is (i.e. no closure containing a definition of `x`). Where Emacs lisp gets weird is that it is possible to have lexical scoping, but its an optional feature that you have to turn on. Let's try it:

	:::scheme
	(setq lexical-binding t)
	
	(let ((x 12))
		   (lambda (y)
		     (* x y)))
		   
Now the second expression evaluates to:

	:::scheme
	(closure ((x . 12) t) (y) (* x y))
	
Aha! A closure! The first part of the closure is a list of pairs that describe the lexical environment. We can see that `x` is bound to 12. The remainder of the closure is the argument list and function body. Because lexical scope was tacked onto Elisp decades after its creation, it doesn't hide closures away from you the way more modern languages do; they are right there, available to be inspected as data structures in the language itself, which is really pretty bizarre. If we funcall this with 3 as an argument, we get 36, just like we did in python or javascript. Internally, these languages are doing the same thing, we as programmers are just not allowed to see it. Emacs lisp is adorably trusting; however, which means we can do stupidly silly things. The closure is just a list, so we can use it as we would any other:

	:::scheme
    (setq cl (let ((x 12))
		       (lambda (y)
		         (* x y))))
				 
The closure is now bound to the symbol `cl`, and we can funcall it:

	:::scheme
    (funcall cl 3)
    ;; => 36
	
We can also modify it, e.g.:

	:::scheme
    (setcdr (caadr cl) 5)
	
We set the `cdr` of the `car` of the `car` of the `cdr` of `cl` to 5. This changes cl to:

	:::scheme
    (closure ((x . 5) t) (y) (* x y))
	
And now:

	:::scheme
    (funcall cl 3)
	;; => 15
	
This is hilarious, but as Gary Bernhardt said, [if you ever actually do this then wat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXEgk1Hdze0).
