I'm James Porter, and you can hire me to build, operate, debug, and
optimize software for you on a contract basis. I'm currently looking
for one more client to work with part-time, ideally around 10-20 hours
a week. I'm a clear and proactive communicator, a highly effective
programmer, and I'm great at keeping sight of bigger picture
organizational goals and finding the simplest technical solution to
meet them.

I've been programming professionally for ten years, mostly focusing on
web applications, infrastructure, and data pipelines. I have the most
experience with Ruby, Python, JavaScript, and Postgres, but I've used
everything from C to Haskell to Neo4j over the years. I'm very good at
learning new technology as needed; choice of languages and tools will
not be an obstacle to our work together. I can debug complex systems
issues and am equally comfortable on greenfield projects or a gnarly
legacy codebase. My past work has also involved community management,
coaching, hiring, business strategy, etc. in addition to programming,
and as a result I'm very adaptable and can see and manage the human
factors that play into a project's success. More details on my
[resume](static/resume.pdf).

I charge $175 an hour. If that sounds too expensive to you, please
[get in touch](mailto:hire@jamesporter.me) anyway. I'm interested in
working with academics and nonprofits, who I know can't always pay as
much as as corporate clients, and I'm happy to negotiate a lower rate
if your project is exciting to me.

If you're interested in working with me, send an email to
[hire@jamesporter.me](mailto:hire@jamesporter.me) with a short
description of your organization and the work. From there we'll set up
a time to chat and decide if it's a good fit. Looking forward to
hearing from you!
